# Close Social Relationships: An Evolutionary Perspective

social bond: ‘an affectional tie that is stable over time and across contexts’ (Brown and Brown 2006: 62) in which ‘the partner is important as a unique individual and is interchangeable with none other’ (Ainsworth 1989: 711).

## Processes of Social Bonding
1. Thus there is an inverse relationship between tie strength and access to diversity of resources: weak ties provide a high diversity of potential resources, but the probability of a request for help being accepted is low, whereas strong ties provide less diversity of potential resources, but the probability of requests for help being granted is high (Roberts 2010). Kinship relaxes this constraint to an extent, providing latent weak ties that can be asked to provide greater help than the direct relationship may suggest, due to the obligations that come from kinship (Espinoza 1999, Roberts and Dunbar 2011a, Curry et al. 2013).

2. Although Fiske (1992, see also Haslam 1997) asserts that the theory is grounded in evolutionary theory, the claim that ‘people interact with others in order to construct and participate in one or another of the four basic types of relationships’ (Fiske 1992: 689, emphasis added) is implausible from an evolution- ary perspective.


### Kinship
while the broad ‘modes of relating’ theories do have some empirical support, they do not enable such precise, specific, and testable a priori hypotheses to be made about differences in patterns of behaviour, and patterns of classifying social relations, as an evolutionary approach grounded in Hamilton’s Rule of kin selection.

## QUANTITY AND QUALITY OF RELATIONSHIPS
### Number of relationships
1. Personal social networks in humans appear to consist of a series of sub-groupings arranged in a hierarchically inclusive sequence (Kahn and Antonucci 1980, Hill and Dunbar 2003, Zhou etal. 2005, Roberts 2010, Sutcliffe etal. 2012 [this volume, chapter 7]).
    - These have been labelled the support clique (of ~5 members), sympathy group (~15), affinity group (~50) and active network (~150) (Sutcliffe et al. 2012 [this volume, chapter 7]).
2. The layer most relevant to our present concerns is the innermost layer, the support clique of approximately five individuals, which can be defined as all those individuals from whom one would seek advice, support, or help in times of severe emotional or financial distress (Dunbar and Spoors 1995). One of the standard questions, used in the US General Social Survey in 1985 and 2001, is ‘looking back over the last **6 months**—who are the people with whom you have discussed matters important to you?’ (Marin 2004, Marsden 1987, McPherson et al. 2006, Ruan 1998, Straits 2000).
3.  The next layer out is the sympathy group. Typically, this layer of relationships has been elicited by asking, following Buys and Larson (1979), ‘whose death tomorrow would you be upset by?’ Other techniques have included name gener- ation prompts (Fischer 1982, Grossetti 2007) and a distinction between ‘very close’ and either ‘somewhat close’ (Kayahara et al. 2005) or ‘close’ friends (Oswald et al. 2004, Rose and Serafica 1986, Wellman et al. 1988).
4.  recent work has shown that rates of self- reported altruism were higher towards close friends that were better-connected, i.e. friends that knew lots of other friends in the network (Curry and Dunbar 2011), suggesting less dense networks may be less supportive. 

### Quality of relationships
1. There are several difficulties in attempting to assess the quality of a particular relationship. First, relationships do not reside in a single individual, but in the regularities in interaction patterns between two individuals (Hinde 1976, Kelley 2000). Second, relationships are not static, but develop and change over time (Burt 2000, Oswald and Clark 2003). Finally, relationships themselves are invisible— their existence can only be inferred (Berscheid 1999).
2. There are two main approaches to measuring quality of relationships. One is to ask an individual to detail their relationships with specified others in the form of a questionnaire or interview, and from this self-report develop a picture of the relationship. The second is to study the pattern of interaction between two individuals directly, and from this pattern infer the relationship (as used in animals: Silk 2007).
3. One of the key indicators of relationship quality or strength that stretches across relationship types seems to be closeness (Berscheid et al. 1989, Clark and Reis 1988, Roberts and Dunbar 2011b). 
4. The Relationship Closeness Inventory (RCI) developed by Berscheid etal. (1989) is one of the more widely used questionnaires to define and measure closeness. The RCI focuses on the respond- ent’s one closest relationship defined as the person with whom respondents had ‘the closest, deepest, most involved, and most intimate relationship’ (p. 793). It examines the frequency with which an individual interacts with their relationship partners alone and face-to-face, the diversity of activities they have done with the partner and the degree to which the partner influences their behaviour, plans, goals, and decisions. These three measures are summed to form an overall measure of closeness. The RCI has high test–retest reliability, can be used across relationship types (kin, friendship, romantic) and is predictive of romantic rela- tionship duration (Berscheid et al. 1989).
5. More broadly, a factor analysis of six different measures of closeness, including the RCI, identified a two-factor model whose elements were labelled ‘**feeling close**’ and ‘**behaving close**’ (Aron et al. 1992). Aron et al. argued that there are two underlying types of closeness: subjective closeness (‘feeling close’) and an objective closeness (‘behaving close’). These do not necessarily bear a close relation to each other: you may have frequent interactions with individuals whom you are not emotionally close to (e.g. work colleagues) and, equally, feel emotionally close to individuals whom you do not interact with very often (e.g. immediate family or very close friends who live far away).

## WHAT MAKES RELATIONSHIPS PERSIST OVER TIME
Building close relationships is one area where there are some marked differences between the three types of close relationships discussed in this review. Mateships involve an element of sexual attraction, kin relations involve shared genetics (and do not need to be built up as such), and close friendships a combination of similarity, shared interests, and time spent together (McPherson etal. 2001, Roberts and Dunbar 2011a, 2011b, Curry and Dunbar 2013), although there may be varying degrees of overlap.

### Building close social bonds
1. - Clearly there are differences in the way in which mateships, kinship relations, and friendships are built up. However, there are also two general principles that apply across relationship types, and both have a strong evolutionary underpinning.
        - First, homophily—the principle that contact occurs at a higher rate between similar people than between dissimilar people—has been shown to operate in mateships as well as in both casual and close friendships (McPherson et al. 2001).
        - The second principle that applies across mateships, kin relations, and friend- ships is that intensely stressful or stimulating situations tend to create strong bonds between individuals. 

2.  Thus the true test of a friend is whether they are there for you in the bad times as well as the good times (Tooby and Cosmides 1996). 

### Maintaining close social bonds
1. at each level of the personal network, there are constraints on the number of network members an individual can maintain at a particular level of intensity. These constraints may be cognitive (the costs of keeping track of a large number of relationships simultaneously) and/or time budgeting (building a relationship with an individual to a particular level of intensity takes a certain amount of time: Roberts 2010).
2. At both sympathy group level (Dunbar and Spoors 1995) and the active network (Roberts et al. 2009), the number of kin in the network appears to constrain the number of friends in the network. This suggests that there is an upper limit to the number of free slots (or ‘friendship niches’; Tooby and Cosmides 1996) in the different grouping layers, and if many of these slots are taken up with kin, there will be fewer slots available for friends.
3. Evidence for the impact of time constraints is provided by the finding that individuals entering a new romantic relationship consistently show a decrease in the size of their social networks (Johnson and Leslie 1982).
4. very close relationships have higher frequencies of both face-to- face and telephone contact than less close (but still important) relationships (Mok et al. 2007, Roberts and Dunbar 2011a).
5. One indication that relationships require active and costly maintenance to survive is that if no effort is made by the relationship partners, relationships tend to decay in emotional intensity over time (Burt 2000, Cummings et al. 2006, Dindia and Canary 1993, Oswald and Clark 2003, Roberts and Dunbar 2011a). To prevent decay, it is necessary to invest in maintenance behaviours that keep the relationship at a satisfactory, committed level.
6.  need for these maintenance behaviours is especially apparent when **the two relationship partners are geographically separated**. Longi- tudinal studies following students as they move from school to college have demonstrated that frequent communication and engaging in other maintenance behaviours can offset the decay in relationships and the loss of psychological closeness (Cummings et al. 2006, Oswald and Clark 2003, Roberts and Dunbar 2011a).
7.  The combination of the obligation to help kin and the dense network kin structure means that kin are both cognitively and time- wise less demanding relationships to maintain than friendships (Roberts 2010, Roberts and Dunbar 2011a).

## CONCLUSIONS
1. Current theories about social relationships tend to be ‘mini-theories’ focused on one specific relationship type—romantic, marital, parental, or friendship (Berscheid 1995). Further, research on relationships often takes place with the outlook of, and using the methods of, one particular discipline—anthropology, social psychology, or social network theory—without much reference to research being conducted in related fields.